docs/install.md, before:

## The ingredients for an install

Getting to the point where you can do this at work or home can be half the battle. The good news is that it can pretty much all be had for free. Let's talk for a second about what this will require:

- **A text editor**
- **Python**
- **Access to a command line interface**
- **pip**
- **virtualenv**
- **virtualenvwrapper**
- **A connection to the internet**

Here's what the various parts do, as well as why you need them:

**The text editor** allows you to write scripts for the Python interpreter in a plain text format. Something along the lines of a full word processor (think Microsoft Word or Apple's Pages) won't cut it; those are designed for presentation and resulting files will be cluttered with a bunch of elements that control text styling. Having one at your disposal is a must for writing code and great for examining data.

**Python** is the engine of the entire affair; it's a code interpreter that's going to look at the commands you write and then faithfully execute them. At the moment this code and guide is designed around version 2.7.

**Access to a command line interface** in the form of the OS X terminal or Windows command prompt. It will be used to run Python scripts and access the Python interpreter.

**pip** is an external Python library that helps you manage the download and installation of packages that don't come with standard Python. There's a lot there already, sure, but people have written new modules to assist with tasks like web scraping and dealing with PDF files. It makes adding new functionality as easy as typing `pip install <some new package>`. **pip** will fetch it from the internet and install it for you -- and do the same for any other packages required to make it all work correctly.

**virtualenv** is an external Python library that allows you to create virtual sandboxes where your scripts can live and have their own packages, completely compartmentalized from one another. It solves a problem in development where you may have conflicting package needs among different pieces of code. It also insulates you from mucking around with the core Python and **pip** you'll be installing. When a new virtual environment is created, it springs up with its own copy of Python and **pip**. The packages in the environment can be modified, removed and reset at will, but it will never screw with the underlying Python and **pip** on the system, even if the environment is deleted.

**virtualenvwrapper** is another external Python library that just makes it easier to deal with the various virtual environments; it keeps them organized in one place, and you can easily jump in and out of environments with a few brief commands. It's important to note that the Windows command prompt has its own version ([**virtualenvwrapper-win**](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenvwrapper-win)).

**A connection to the internet** is necessary because **pip** will be fetching packages from the web.

## On Windows
	
!!! note
	This guide is for Windows 8.1. For other versions of Windows, this process should be similar.

1\. **Download Python 2.7**

You'll want to download the [most current release of Python 2 for Windows](https://www.python.org/downloads/windows); you'll likely have the best luck with the *Windows x86 MSI installer*.

---

2\. **Install Python 2.7**

After opening the installer, there are two things you'll want to include during the installation process that should make your life much easier.

First, the installer will give you the option of having **pip** ride along with the rest of the Python installation. By default, this should already be selected for you.

Second, the installer will give you the option to add python.exe to your PATH. All that means is that typing `python` at the command prompt will get you to the interpreter or give you the ability to execute a Python script, regardless of where you've navigated on your system. By default, this will **not** be selected; you'll have to change it on your own.

**Make sure both of these options are selected before completing the install.**

---

3\. **Verify installation of Python and pip**

Open the Windows command prompt. If you're unable to locate it in the "Start" menu, search for an application called **cmd**.

To check that Python was installed successfully, issue the following command:

```bash
python --version
```

If everything went as planned, this should spit out the version number of Python you just installed. 

!!! caution
	If you get an error message that says Python isn't recognized as a legitimate command, something's gone awry. Python may not have been added to your command prompt PATH, which you can resolve by following step 3 in [this guide](http://www.anthonydebarros.com/2014/02/16/setting-up-python-in-windows-8-1/). If the main Python directory, its Scripts folder and site-packages are all in the PATH, you'll need to attempt to reinstall.

Once we've verified all is well with Python, let's turn our attention to **pip**:

```bash
pip list
```
If **pip** was installed correctly along with Python, you should get a quick recap of nonstandard packages it can find. The output probably looks something like:

```bash
pip (7.0.1)
setuptools (16.0)
```
It may also have a message griping about an outdated version of **pip**, but let's not worry about that right now.

!!! caution
	If the command prompt threw some kind of error at you, **pip** may not be installed and there are a couple of things you can try. You can reinstall Python from the MSI file and make sure the option to install **pip** is selected. It can also be installed manually by following [the instructions here](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installing.html).

---

4\. **Install virtualenv**

With **pip**, adding the **virtualenv** package is as easy as typing:

```bash
pip install virtualenv
```

It should appear among pip and setuptools when you type ```pip list``` and you should be able to verify the version with:

```bash
virtualenv --version
```

---

5\. **Install virtualenvwrapper-win**

You may start to be seeing a pattern here with installation using **pip**:

```bash
pip install virtualenvwrapper-win
```
!!! caution
	If you prefer to use a more robust command line interface like Windows PowerShell, note that the package **virtualenvwrapper-win** won't work; try something like **virtualenvwrapper-powershell** instead.
	
This wrapper just adds commands for easier interaction with **virtualenv**. For example: Instead of having to navigate to an environment's "Scripts" folder and ```activate``` it, typing ```workon <virtual environment>``` wherever you're navigated in the system achieves the same effect.

!!! caution
	**Tcl** and **tk** come with Python 2.7 and don't appear to automatically work inside of Windows virtualenvs; this will derail things like ```%paste``` in iPython. You'll need to navigate to the virtualenv's folder and modify the ```activate.bat``` script by adding the following lines (with the paths to your installation of Python — defaults below): 
```bash
set "TCL_LIBRARY=C:\Python27\tcl\tcl8.5"
set "TK_LIBRARY=C:\Python27\tcl\tk8.5"
``` 

---

**Other ways into Python on Windows**

In recent years IRE has been teaching Python in PC labs, and the easiest way to get everyone set up quickly has been to use the [Anaconda distribution of Python](http://continuum.io/downloads), which comes with many popular nonstandard libraries already installed alongside the core program.

This remains an option available to you; it comes with **pip** and has its own method of segregating projects into virtual environments.

---

## On OS X

Python comes pre-installed on OS X, which actually makes the process of getting set up properly more difficult.

Yes, more difficult.

The version accompanying OS X has been tinkered with by Apple, and it's responsible for other functionality on your computer. It's also likely out of date.

The accepted way to get around this problem is to install an OS X program called [Homebrew](http://brew.sh/), which is essentially a package manager for your system — similar to what pip does for Python. It will allow you to download an independent and updateable version of Python that you can use going forward. A side benefit is that pip comes with the Python you install with Homebrew.

Not to evangelize about Homebrew too much, but if you decide to travel down the path leading to some of the more complex data journalism techniques on the command line, you'll find other uses for Homebrew and its many packages beyond just providing a clean copy of Python.

It has downsides; Homebrew requires a current version of Apple's Xcode's command line tools to be installed on your computer first. A full guide is [available here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew/blob/master/share/doc/homebrew/Installation.md) to get you up and running.

!!! caution
	Changes in OS X 10.11 El Capitan can make this process even trickier. Apple insituted extra system protections that have the capability of adding a few steps to the Homebrew install process. If you're running into these issues, [read this](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew/blob/master/share/doc/homebrew/El_Capitan_and_Homebrew.md) for more information.

!!! note
	You can also use the built-in OS X Python if you wish. The next step in that case will be getting pip up and running.
	
1\. **Check for pip**

Homebrew's Python comes with pip in tow. If you're using the OS X system version, let's see if it's installed. Open the Terminal and type the following:
```bash
pip -V
```
If pip is installed, this will return a version number.

----
	
2\. **If it's not there: Get pip**

Download [```get-pip.py```](https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py), navigate to it and type the following:
```bash
python get-pip.py
```
For more information on installing pip, there's a [walkthrough](http://pip.readthedocs.org/en/stable/installing/) as a part of its online documentation.

----

3\. **Verify the presence of Python and pip**

Let's see what we're working with here and check to make sure all is well:
```bash
python -V
pip -V
```

----

4\. **Get and install virtualenv**

With **pip**, adding the **virtualenv** package is as easy as typing:

```bash
pip install virtualenv
```

It should appear among pip and setuptools when you type ```pip list``` and you should be able to verify the version with:

```bash
virtualenv --version
```


----

5\. **Get and install virtualenvwrapper**

We can install virtualenvwrapper with **pip** as well:

```bash
pip install virtualenvwrapper
```
	
This wrapper just adds commands for easier interaction with **virtualenv**. For example: Instead of having to navigate to an environment's "Scripts" folder and ```activate``` it, typing ```workon <virtual environment>``` wherever you're navigated in the system achieves the same effect.

----

6\. **Modify your .bash_profile so you can use virtualenvwrapper commands and give your virtualenvs a home**

This can be accomplished by opening your .bash_profile, which is typically in your main user directory. Typing:
```bash
open -e ~/.bash_profile
```
Opens the file in your system's default text editor — probably TextEdit.

If you get an error saying that the file doesn't exist, create one and then try opening it again.
```bash
touch ~/.bash_profile
open -e ~/.bash_profile
```

----

7\. **Reload your .bash_profile**

So that these new changes take effect, type:
```bash
source ~/.bash_profile
```

----

## Test run

```bash
mkvirtualenv mytest
deactivate
workon
workon mytest
pip list mytest
```
----

## Getting "Coding for Journalists"

A repository for all of the files is presently hosted on GitHub, which is likely how you navigated here in the first place. You can just [copy a zipped version](https://github.com/ireapps/coding-for-journalists/archive/master.zip) of all the files for your use or fork it using GitHub's desktop application or git from the command line. For help with git and GitHub, there are some [resources in "Next Steps."](next_steps.md)

Once you have the files, you'll need to set up a virtualenv told hold the required libraries.

```bash
mkvirtualenv cfj
```

You should automatically be placed inside the new virtualenv after creation. From there, the ```requirements.txt``` file within the main folder lists every necessary library to make these scripts run.

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
!!! caution
	One requirement isn't designed for Windows, so there is a separate file ```requirements-win.txt``` that should be used instead.

Once that's done, you'll have non-standard Python libraries and add-ons like **geopy**, **iPython** and **requests** at your disposal.

Commit message:

fix jdcal issue and add .bash_profile lines to docs

docs/install.md, after:

## The ingredients for an install

Getting to the point where you can do this at work or home can be half the battle. The good news is that it can pretty much all be had for free. Let's talk for a second about what this will require:

- **A text editor**
- **Python**
- **Access to a command line interface**
- **pip**
- **virtualenv**
- **virtualenvwrapper**
- **A connection to the internet**

Here's what the various parts do, as well as why you need them:

**The text editor** allows you to write scripts for the Python interpreter in a plain text format. Something along the lines of a full word processor (think Microsoft Word or Apple's Pages) won't cut it; those are designed for presentation and resulting files will be cluttered with a bunch of elements that control text styling. Having one at your disposal is a must for writing code and great for examining data.

**Python** is the engine of the entire affair; it's a code interpreter that's going to look at the commands you write and then faithfully execute them. At the moment this code and guide is designed around version 2.7.

**Access to a command line interface** in the form of the OS X terminal or Windows command prompt. It will be used to run Python scripts and access the Python interpreter.

**pip** is an external Python library that helps you manage the download and installation of packages that don't come with standard Python. There's a lot there already, sure, but people have written new modules to assist with tasks like web scraping and dealing with PDF files. It makes adding new functionality as easy as typing `pip install <some new package>`. **pip** will fetch it from the internet and install it for you -- and do the same for any other packages required to make it all work correctly.

**virtualenv** is an external Python library that allows you to create virtual sandboxes where your scripts can live and have their own packages, completely compartmentalized from one another. It solves a problem in development where you may have conflicting package needs among different pieces of code. It also insulates you from mucking around with the core Python and **pip** you'll be installing. When a new virtual environment is created, it springs up with its own copy of Python and **pip**. The packages in the environment can be modified, removed and reset at will, but it will never screw with the underlying Python and **pip** on the system, even if the environment is deleted.

**virtualenvwrapper** is another external Python library that just makes it easier to deal with the various virtual environments; it keeps them organized in one place, and you can easily jump in and out of environments with a few brief commands. It's important to note that the Windows command prompt has its own version ([**virtualenvwrapper-win**](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenvwrapper-win)).

**A connection to the internet** is necessary because **pip** will be fetching packages from the web.

## On Windows
	
!!! note
	This guide is for Windows 8.1. For other versions of Windows, this process should be similar.

1\. **Download Python 2.7**

You'll want to download the [most current release of Python 2 for Windows](https://www.python.org/downloads/windows); you'll likely have the best luck with the *Windows x86 MSI installer*.

---

2\. **Install Python 2.7**

After opening the installer, there are two things you'll want to include during the installation process that should make your life much easier.

First, the installer will give you the option of having **pip** ride along with the rest of the Python installation. By default, this should already be selected for you.

Second, the installer will give you the option to add python.exe to your PATH. All that means is that typing `python` at the command prompt will get you to the interpreter or give you the ability to execute a Python script, regardless of where you've navigated on your system. By default, this will **not** be selected; you'll have to change it on your own.

**Make sure both of these options are selected before completing the install.**

---

3\. **Verify installation of Python and pip**

Open the Windows command prompt. If you're unable to locate it in the "Start" menu, search for an application called **cmd**.

To check that Python was installed successfully, issue the following command:

```bash
python --version
```

If everything went as planned, this should spit out the version number of Python you just installed. 

!!! caution
	If you get an error message that says Python isn't recognized as a legitimate command, something's gone awry. Python may not have been added to your command prompt PATH, which you can resolve by following step 3 in [this guide](http://www.anthonydebarros.com/2014/02/16/setting-up-python-in-windows-8-1/). If the main Python directory, its Scripts folder and site-packages are all in the PATH, you'll need to attempt to reinstall.

Once we've verified all is well with Python, let's turn our attention to **pip**:

```bash
pip list
```
If **pip** was installed correctly along with Python, you should get a quick recap of nonstandard packages it can find. The output probably looks something like:

```bash
pip (7.0.1)
setuptools (16.0)
```
It may also have a message griping about an outdated version of **pip**, but let's not worry about that right now.

!!! caution
	If the command prompt threw some kind of error at you, **pip** may not be installed and there are a couple of things you can try. You can reinstall Python from the MSI file and make sure the option to install **pip** is selected. It can also be installed manually by following [the instructions here](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installing.html).

---

4\. **Install virtualenv**

With **pip**, adding the **virtualenv** package is as easy as typing:

```bash
pip install virtualenv
```

It should appear among pip and setuptools when you type ```pip list``` and you should be able to verify the version with:

```bash
virtualenv --version
```

---

5\. **Install virtualenvwrapper-win**

You may start to be seeing a pattern here with installation using **pip**:

```bash
pip install virtualenvwrapper-win
```
!!! caution
	If you prefer to use a more robust command line interface like Windows PowerShell, note that the package **virtualenvwrapper-win** won't work; try something like **virtualenvwrapper-powershell** instead.
	
This wrapper just adds commands for easier interaction with **virtualenv**. For example: Instead of having to navigate to an environment's "Scripts" folder and ```activate``` it, typing ```workon <virtual environment>``` wherever you're navigated in the system achieves the same effect.

!!! caution
	**Tcl** and **tk** come with Python 2.7 and don't appear to automatically work inside of Windows virtualenvs; this will derail things like ```%paste``` in iPython. You'll need to navigate to the virtualenv's folder and modify the ```activate.bat``` script by adding the following lines (with the paths to your installation of Python — defaults below): 
```bash
set "TCL_LIBRARY=C:\Python27\tcl\tcl8.5"
set "TK_LIBRARY=C:\Python27\tcl\tk8.5"
``` 

---

**Other ways into Python on Windows**

In recent years IRE has been teaching Python in PC labs, and the easiest way to get everyone set up quickly has been to use the [Anaconda distribution of Python](http://continuum.io/downloads), which comes with many popular nonstandard libraries already installed alongside the core program.

This remains an option available to you; it comes with **pip** and has its own method of segregating projects into virtual environments.

---

## On OS X

Python comes pre-installed on OS X, which actually makes the process of getting set up properly more difficult.

Yes, more difficult.

The version accompanying OS X has been tinkered with by Apple, and it's responsible for other functionality on your computer. It's also likely out of date.

The accepted way to get around this problem is to install an OS X program called [Homebrew](http://brew.sh/), which is essentially a package manager for your system — similar to what pip does for Python. It will allow you to download an independent and updateable version of Python that you can use going forward. A side benefit is that pip comes with the Python you install with Homebrew.

Not to evangelize about Homebrew too much, but if you decide to travel down the path leading to some of the more complex data journalism techniques on the command line, you'll find other uses for Homebrew and its many packages beyond just providing a clean copy of Python.

It has downsides; Homebrew requires a current version of Apple's Xcode's command line tools to be installed on your computer first. A full guide is [available here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew/blob/master/share/doc/homebrew/Installation.md) to get you up and running.

!!! caution
	Changes in OS X 10.11 El Capitan can make this process even trickier. Apple insituted extra system protections that have the capability of adding a few steps to the Homebrew install process. If you're running into these issues, [read this](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew/blob/master/share/doc/homebrew/El_Capitan_and_Homebrew.md) for more information.

!!! note
	You can also use the built-in OS X Python if you wish. The next step in that case will be getting pip up and running.
	
1\. **Check for pip**

Homebrew's Python comes with pip in tow. If you're using the OS X system version, let's see if it's installed. Open the Terminal and type the following:
```bash
pip -V
```
If pip is installed, this will return a version number.

----
	
2\. **If it's not there: Get pip**

Download [```get-pip.py```](https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py), navigate to it and type the following:
```bash
python get-pip.py
```
For more information on installing pip, there's a [walkthrough](http://pip.readthedocs.org/en/stable/installing/) as a part of its online documentation.

----

3\. **Verify the presence of Python and pip**

Let's see what we're working with here and check to make sure all is well:
```bash
python -V
pip -V
```

----

4\. **Get and install virtualenv**

With **pip**, adding the **virtualenv** package is as easy as typing:

```bash
pip install virtualenv
```

It should appear among pip and setuptools when you type ```pip list``` and you should be able to verify the version with:

```bash
virtualenv --version
```


----

5\. **Get and install virtualenvwrapper**

We can install virtualenvwrapper with **pip** as well:

```bash
pip install virtualenvwrapper
```
	
This wrapper just adds commands for easier interaction with **virtualenv**. For example: Instead of having to navigate to an environment's "Scripts" folder and ```activate``` it, typing ```workon <virtual environment>``` wherever you're navigated in the system achieves the same effect.

----

6\. **Modify your .bash_profile so you can use virtualenvwrapper commands and give your virtualenvs a home**

This can be accomplished by opening your .bash_profile, which is typically in your main user directory. Typing:
```bash
open -e ~/.bash_profile
```
Opens the file in your system's default text editor — probably TextEdit.

If you get an error saying that the file doesn't exist, create one and then try opening it again.
```bash
touch ~/.bash_profile
open -e ~/.bash_profile
```

The following lines need to be added once it's been opened:

```bash
export WORKON_HOME=~/Envs
source /usr/local/bin/virtualenvwrapper.sh
```
The first line just sets up a directory for your virtual environments; if you don't want them in your Home directory in a folder called "Envs," you can change the path accordingly.

The second line is a hook for **virtualenvwrapper** so that its commands will work when you type them in the Terminal. 

----

7\. **Reload your .bash_profile**

So that these new changes take effect, type:
```bash
source ~/.bash_profile
```

You should see several new thing run in the Terminal after the reload as it makes a place for your environments.

----

## Test run

```bash
mkvirtualenv mytest
deactivate
workon
workon mytest
pip list mytest
```

These lines do the following:

- Create a new virtual environment called "mytest"
- Exit the "mytest" environment
- List the virtual environments that presently exist
- Move into the "mytest" environment again
- List all libraries presently installed in "mytest"

----

## Getting "Coding for Journalists"

A repository for all of the files is presently hosted on GitHub, which is likely how you navigated here in the first place. You can just [copy a zipped version](https://github.com/ireapps/coding-for-journalists/archive/master.zip) of all the files for your use or fork it using GitHub's desktop application or git from the command line. For help with git and GitHub, there are some [resources in "Next Steps."](next_steps.md)

Once you have the files, you'll need to set up a virtualenv told hold the required libraries.

```bash
mkvirtualenv cfj
```

You should automatically be placed inside the new virtualenv after creation. From there, the ```requirements.txt``` file within the main folder lists every necessary library to make these scripts run.

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
!!! caution
	One requirement isn't designed for Windows, so there is a separate file ```requirements-win.txt``` that should be used instead.

Once that's done, you'll have non-standard Python libraries and add-ons like **geopy**, **iPython** and **requests** at your disposal.
